#
# This file is autogenerated by pip-compile with Python 3.11
# by the following command:
#
#    pip-compile requirements.in
#
accessible-pygments==0.0.5
    # via pydata-sphinx-theme
alabaster==1.0.0
    # via sphinx
astor==0.8.1
    # via -r requirements.in
babel==2.17.0
    # via
    #   pydata-sphinx-theme
    #   sphinx
beautifulsoup4==4.13.4
    # via pydata-sphinx-theme
certifi==2025.6.15
    # via requests
charset-normalizer==3.4.2
    # via requests
click==8.2.1
    # via sphinx-external-toc
contourpy==1.3.2
    # via matplotlib
cycler==0.12.1
    # via matplotlib
docutils==0.21.2
    # via
    #   -r requirements.in
    #   myst-parser
    #   pybtex-docutils
    #   pydata-sphinx-theme
    #   sphinx
    #   sphinx-proof
    #   sphinx-tabs
    #   sphinxcontrib-bibtex
fonttools==4.58.5
    # via matplotlib
idna==3.10
    # via requests
imagesize==1.4.1
    # via sphinx
jinja2==3.1.6
    # via
    #   myst-parser
    #   sphinx
kiwisolver==1.4.8
    # via matplotlib
latexcodec==3.0.1
    # via pybtex
markdown-it-py==3.0.0
    # via
    #   mdit-py-plugins
    #   myst-parser
markupsafe==3.0.2
    # via jinja2
matplotlib==3.10.3
    # via -r requirements.in
mdit-py-plugins==0.4.2
    # via myst-parser
mdurl==0.1.2
    # via markdown-it-py
myst-parser==4.0.1
    # via -r requirements.in
numpy==2.3.1
    # via
    #   -r requirements.in
    #   contourpy
    #   matplotlib
    #   pandas
packaging==25.0
    # via
    #   matplotlib
    #   pydata-sphinx-theme
    #   sphinx
pandas==2.3.1
    # via -r requirements.in
pillow==11.3.0
    # via matplotlib
pybtex==0.25.1
    # via
    #   -r requirements.in
    #   pybtex-docutils
    #   sphinxcontrib-bibtex
pybtex-docutils==1.0.3
    # via sphinxcontrib-bibtex
pydata-sphinx-theme==0.15.4
    # via
    #   -r requirements.in
    #   sphinx-book-theme
pygments==2.19.2
    # via
    #   accessible-pygments
    #   pydata-sphinx-theme
    #   sphinx
    #   sphinx-tabs
pyparsing==3.2.3
    # via matplotlib
python-dateutil==2.9.0.post0
    # via
    #   matplotlib
    #   pandas
pytz==2025.2
    # via pandas
pyyaml==6.0.2
    # via
    #   myst-parser
    #   pybtex
    #   sphinx-external-toc
requests==2.32.4
    # via sphinx
roman-numerals-py==3.1.0
    # via sphinx
six==1.17.0
    # via python-dateutil
snowballstemmer==3.0.1
    # via sphinx
soupsieve==2.7
    # via beautifulsoup4
sphinx==8.2.3
    # via
    #   -r requirements.in
    #   myst-parser
    #   pydata-sphinx-theme
    #   sphinx-book-theme
    #   sphinx-exercise
    #   sphinx-external-toc
    #   sphinx-proof
    #   sphinx-tabs
    #   sphinxcontrib-bibtex
sphinx-book-theme==1.1.4
    # via
    #   -r requirements.in
    #   sphinx-exercise
    #   sphinx-proof
sphinx-exercise==1.0.1
    # via -r requirements.in
sphinx-external-toc==1.0.1
    # via -r requirements.in
sphinx-proof==0.2.1
    # via -r requirements.in
sphinx-tabs==3.4.7
    # via -r requirements.in
sphinxcontrib-applehelp==2.0.0
    # via sphinx
sphinxcontrib-bibtex==2.6.5
    # via -r requirements.in
sphinxcontrib-devhelp==2.0.0
    # via sphinx
sphinxcontrib-htmlhelp==2.1.0
    # via sphinx
sphinxcontrib-jsmath==1.0.1
    # via sphinx
sphinxcontrib-qthelp==2.0.0
    # via sphinx
sphinxcontrib-serializinghtml==2.0.0
    # via sphinx
typing-extensions==4.14.1
    # via
    #   beautifulsoup4
    #   pydata-sphinx-theme
tzdata==2025.2
    # via pandas
urllib3==2.5.0
    # via requests
