---
jupytext:
  formats: md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
kernelspec:
  name: python3
  display_name: Python 3
---

(sec_learning-and-programming)=
# Learning <span class="ast">\*</span>and<span class="ast">\*</span> programming

As described in the previous section, I will introduce concepts alongside, or
sometimes even after, practical examples. Whenever possible, I will also show
_implementations_ written in a relatively modern language. I will use
{extlink}`Python <https://www.python.org>` and its _data science stack_, made
up of the libraries mainly used by the open-source community focused on data
analysis[^libraries] (at the time this book was written). To follow the book
effectively, a basic knowledge of programming is therefore strongly
recommended.

```{margin}
This book is an evolution of a set of lecture notes designed for second-year
students in computer-science bachelor programs. Accordingly, I assume the
programming skills that are usually acquired during the first year of such
degrees, or in similar curricula.
```

{ref}`chap_introducing-python` provides a medium-high-level overview of the
Python features I use in the book, designed to allow readers who already know
how to program, but do not know this language, to catch up. Reading that
chapter is recommended in any case, because it allows readers to become
familiar from the start with the conventions I use in code.

```{margin}
The interactive components rely on {extlink}`PyScript
<https://pyscript.net/>`, a technology that makes it possible to execute
Python code in modern web browsers. This technology has the advantage of
requiring no installation or manual configuration, but it does require an
active internet connection and a browser compatible with WebAssembly (such as
Chrome, Firefox, Edge, Safari, and Chromium-based browsers).
```

This book is written using a technology that allows some content to be
generated by executing Python code. Whenever I guide readers through the
implementation of one or more concepts, the code is shown explicitly. By
contrast, when it only serves to produce elements such as tables or charts, it
is hidden, but a "Show code" link makes it possible to display it[^hidden-code].
I strongly encourage readers to take advantage of that possibility: just as
passively reading a text makes little sense, executing code without thinking
about it is of limited value. What matters is analyzing it, understanding it,
and modifying it in order to grasp how it works more deeply &mdash; in short,
_playing with it_ in the original _hacker_ sense of the term[^hacker]. In any
case, some of the content is interactive, as shown for instance in
{ref}`sec_overview`: manipulating those elements, which does not require
reading any code, is meant precisely to make the introduced concepts easier to
understand.

Very often I will guide readers through the practical implementation of the
fundamental tools, especially in the first part devoted to descriptive
statistics. It is important to stress that these implementations are not meant
to replace professional libraries. Their purpose is instead to focus attention
on the essential aspects of one or more concepts, in order to make them easier
to understand. The reasoning behind this approach is analogous to the idea
that software developers should have learned how to write the main sorting
algorithms from scratch (and, if necessary, still be able to do so), while in
professional settings they use the implementations available in optimized and
carefully validated libraries, to a degree that would be very hard to achieve
individually. In this spirit, the do-it-yourself implementations will be
followed immediately by the use of state-of-the-art libraries.

Readers with no programming experience can still read this book, simply by
skipping the parts that contain, describe, or discuss code. In that case,
however, they should be aware of the risk of not fully absorbing the material,
since a large part of the presentation alternates between explanation and
code. In such a situation, I recommend considering books that follow a more
traditional approach, such as:

- Probability and Statistics for Engineering and the Sciences, by Sheldon Ross
  {cite:p}`ross`,
- Introduction to Statistics, by Marylin K. Pelosi, Theresa M. Sandifer,
  Paola Cerchiello and Paolo Giudici {cite:p}`pelosi`.

I want to warn anyone who plans to use this book to learn programming while,
at the same time, learning data analysis. This is _not_ a book for learning to
program. It is, rather, a book for learning _by using_ programming, that is,
by writing code to make the learning process of another subject more robust.
People say that you have really understood something only when you can explain
it to your grandmother[^cite-granny]. I would go one step further and say that
you do not truly master a technical concept unless you are able to implement it
by writing a program. To follow this philosophy, however, you must already know
how to write software, and that is a competence that requires time, effort,
and dedicated teaching materials to acquire. For readers starting from
scratch, I recommend a few reference texts, more or less recent:

- {extlink}`Think Python <https://allendowney.github.io/ThinkPython/>`, by
  Allen B. Downey {cite:p}`downey`,
- C Programming: A Modern Approach, by Kim N. King {cite:p}`king`,
- Programming in Go, by Ivo Balbaert {cite:p}`balbaert`.

I deliberately chose books devoted to different languages, to stress that what
really matters is not mastering the details of one specific language, but
understanding the foundations of programming as a discipline in its own right.


````{margin}
```{figure} ../../_static/img/whistle.jpg
---
name: fig-whistle
height: 100px
---
A Cap’n Crunch Bo’sun Whistle (image from the Heinz Nixdorf MuseumsForum,
distributed under {extlink}`CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
<https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/>`)
```
````

[^libraries]: The repository associated with this book includes a
{extlink}`file <https://github.com/dariomalchiodi/sds/blob/main/requirements.in>`
listing all the libraries used to generate the contents, including those
needed to execute the code.

[^hidden-code]: It’s important to keep in mind that hidden code may contain
technical details connected with generating the content displayed on web pages
(for example HTML elements or CSS styles). As a consequence, it is not written
in the same way as code one would use to analyze data in a traditional working
environment: its structure responds more to presentation and interactivity
needs than to analytical ones.

[^hacker]: In everyday language, the term _hacker_ is often used with a
negative meaning, referring to someone who pursues malicious goals by writing
or modifying software, or by exploiting security flaws to misuse computing
technologies. Originally, however, that was not the case. In modern English,
the term appears around 1960 with a more neutral meaning, not necessarily tied
to computer science: it indicated a person able to understand a system so
deeply as to control it and adapt it to purposes different from those intended
by its designers. One of the earliest famous _hacks_ &mdash; illegal though it
was &mdash; involved using the «Cap’n Crunch Bo’sun Whistle» (a whistle found
inside boxes of a famous breakfast cereal, shown in {numref}`fig-whistle`) to
place free long-distance and international calls from certain public telephones
in the United States. One of the places where hacker counterculture first began
to develop was the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT): the earliest
written trace of the word «hacking» appears in the minutes of a 1955 meeting of
the {extlink}`Tech Model Railroad Club <http://tmrc.mit.edu/>`, a group of
students who were passionate about model railways. The direct association with
computer science came only later.

[^cite-granny]: The true origin of this saying is hard to pinpoint: some
attribute it to Einstein, others to Feynman, and others again to Rutherford,
so there seems to be a general consensus at least on its roots in the physical
sciences. In its best-known version, however, the saying is rather stereotyped
in its treatment of grandmothers, and that is probably linked to the fact that
it started circulating quite some time ago. There are indeed several variants:
some equally questionable, in which the grandmother is replaced for some
reason by a bartender, and others in which a child takes her place.
