---
jupytext:
  formats: md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
kernelspec:
  name: python3
  display_name: Python 3
---

(sec:use-in-teaching)=
# Use in teaching

For a number of years, I have been teaching the course
[Statistics and Data Analysis](https://malchiodi.di.unimi.it/teaching/SAD/en)
in the Bachelor's program in Computer Science at the University of Milan. This
book has evolved from a set of lecture notes I developed to supplement the
textbooks used in the course, with the goal of covering both some more
_computational_ aspects of the lessons and certain topics that are not
addressed in standard textbooks.

With reference to the Italian education system, the teaching of core principles
of data analysis within Computer Science degree programs is typically
concentrated in a single course during the second year. This course generally
covers both the theoretical aspects of probability and mathematical statistics
and the more practical components of descriptive statistics. As a result, it is
often hard to find suitable textbooks, since these disciplines are frequently
taught separately&mdash;such as in Mathematics programs. Consequently, the
landscape of available textbooks mostly includes excellent volumes focused on
only one of these disciplines, or books that give primary attention to one area
while downplaying the others. I have yet to find a textbook that assigns the
same relative weight to these three areas as I do in my lectures.

For this reason, as the «critical mass» of my lecture notes grew, I decided to
write a book that would eliminate the need to adopt two or more different
textbooks, which would in any case have to be supplemented by handouts to fill
the resulting gaps.

The contents are organized according to the logical progression I follow in my
classes. The first part focuses on computational foundations, introducing
Python and the libraries used throughout the book. The second part, devoted to
data analysis in the practical sense, introduces the key topics of descriptive
statistics and the corresponding tools, with an emphasis on their direct use
through Python code and the analysis of a reference dataset. This is followed
by a section on probability theory, aimed at presenting the main concepts
related to modeling uncertainty from a probabilistic perspective. The final
part presents the basics of inferential statistics, focusing on parametric
inference. In presenting these topics, I have tried to limit the use of
mathematical formalism to what is strictly necessary in order to introduce the
concepts rigorously.

Sections marked with an asterisk include further discussions and additional
material that may be skipped&mdash;they mainly cover topics that I don’t have
time to explain during class but strongly recommend to students who wish to
deepen their understanding of the subject, especially with a view toward
continuing their studies at the Master's level.
